Secure WordVault
Copyright 2010 Albert Wolfe <albert@laowaichinese.net>


How Do I Use Secure WordVault?

Double click on Secure WordVault files to open them. No installation is
necessary and you can open Secure WordVault files on any computer running
Windows XP or later. Secure WordVault files have a ".exe" file extension because
each file contains both the encrypted text in the document and the Secure
WordVault executable program that runs when you double click the files.

Secure WordVault is a text editor just like Microsoft Notepad. The menus should
be familiar and easy to use.

You choose a password the first time you save a new file, and you can change the
password at any time after than with the "File" -> "Change Password..." menu
option.


What can Secure WordVault do?

Secure WordVault is an editor for encrypted plain text. That means there is no
formatting stored in documents you create. (You can change the font that Secure
WordVault uses to display text in "Format" -> "Font...".)

Secure WordVault runs in any Windows XP or later operating system.


Secure WordVault is open source. How does that affect security?

Secure WordVault uses 256-bit AES encryption which, coincidentally, the US
government has approved for the encryption of top secret information[1]. It's no
secret that Secure WordVault uses this encryption algorithm, because the real 
security of the encryption lies in the strength of the password you chose for
your document. The only way to hack into a document encrypted with AES
encryption is to guess the password (or guess a random password that also
happens to work, but that's extremely unlikely). The harder a password is to
guess, the stronger the password is. The strongest passwords are just a string
of random letters, numbers, and symbols, the longer the better.


How does Secure WordVault work?

Secure WordVault documents contain the executable code for running the program
so that when you double click a Secure WordVault document, Windows runs the
program instead of trying to open the file with a different program. The
encrypted document data is stored inside the exe file. When it comes time to
save a document, it turns out that it's impossible to write to a file that's
currently executing in Windows. For this reason, Secure WordVault copies the
program code (not the encrypted data) to a temporary location and runs that
instead of the actual document file. That way the document file is available to
be overwritten when the time comes.


How does the password strength meter work?

Passwords are given a score from 1 to 100. The strength is reported as follows:
    1-19: Very Weak
    20-39: Weak
    40-59: Good
    60-79: Strong
    80-100: Very Strong
Passwords are given points for the following:
    password length:
        1-4 characters: 5 points
        5-7 characters: 10 points
        8+ characters: 25 points
    letters:
        no letters: 0 points
        either upper case or lower case but not both: 10 points
        both upper and lower case: 20 points
    numbers:
        no numbers: 0 points
        1-2 unique numeric digits: 10 points
        3+ unique numeric digits: 20 points
    symbols:
        no symbols: 0 points
        1 symbol: 10 points
        2+ unique symbols: 25 points
    bonus:
        up to 5 points for combinations of high scores in the above categories
An example of a 100 point password would be "aaA123~!"



[1] Lynn Hathaway (June 2003). "National Policy on the Use of the Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES) to Protect National Security Systems and National
Security Information" <http://www.cnss.gov/Assets/pdf/cnssp_15_fs.pdf>.
Retrieved 2008-11-02.

